1. COMPASS: Rotational Keyboard on Non-Touch Smartwatches
Yi et al. (2017) developed COMPASS, a multi-cursor , bezel-based, text entry technique for non-touch
smartwatches. The user can enter text by rotating a bezel that rotates three cursors simultaneously, 
then press a button to enter the selected character. When doing a long press, the user enters word selection mode and
then can select a word with a single cursor by rotating the bezel and confirm the selection.
User studies showed that pick-up speeds from 9.3 WPM to 12.5 WPM (Yi et al. 2017: 9) can be reached. This interaction
technique is a good method to solve e.g. the fat finger problem and to reduce battery life as no touchscreen is required.

2. Investigating Tilt-based Gesture Keyboard Entry for Single-Handed Text Entry on Large Devices
Yeo et al. (2017) introduce Shape Writing in Motion (SWiM) which is a tilt-based, gesture keyboard text entry technique that 
is especially useful when only one hand is available and the user has a device with a large screen.
This pointing technique supports entering one word per gesture and can be used on phones, tablets and smartwatches.
In this case, the pointer can be a ball that the user tilts over the keyboard and that draws kind of a line over the letters that the user wants to select in order. At first,
one has to tap on the so called "chat head" which is sort of a circle-shaped region in order to start input, a second tap
finishes the input. The study has shown, that SWiM is cognitively quite demanding, however, the authors don't have the intention
to replace common input techniques but to facilitate text input when only one hand is available.

3. Handsfree Omnidirectional VR Navigation using Head Tilt
Tregillus et al. (2017) present a method for navigating in mobile VR by tilting the head to move forward and indicate the
direction to go. Thereby, the user has to lean forward to move and lean right or left to make little corrections in his travel.
The study showed that user performed tasks 15 seconds faster when using head tilt than other methods.
However, it was stated that head tilt isn't suitable for all VR applications as vertical head tilt is critical as mentioned above.
Nevertheless, it is quite useful to perform handsfree VR locomotion.
