This paper by MacKenzie and Soukoreff(2002) gives an overview of state of the art mobile text
entry technologies. 
In the beginning, they state two main methods to improve text entry performance. These are movement minimisation and
language prediction. 
Movement minimisation has the goal to reduce the distance a finger/pen has to take when interacting with a mobile device
in order to fasten interaction, whereas language prediction makes interaction faster by using statistical models. An example
would be autocompletion which could also be found in the T9 technique years ago. 
In the following paragraph, an overview over key-based text entry shall be given:
One technique for text entry is e.g. the telephone keypad which consists of 12 keys with numbers
and letters on it. Because text entry via keypad is quite ambiguous, disambiguation can be achieved with on of
the following three approaches that are multi-tap (clicking multiple times on a key until the desired letter appears)
, two-key-method (user hits two keys successively to determine the letter to be selected) and the one-key technique with disambiguation
which uses statistical methods, T9 is an example for this as already mentioned.
A second key-based text entry method are small qwerty keyboards that are often seen at Blackberry mobile devices.
Third, five-key text entry which is often used on very small devices is also a very popular key-based text entry technique. It can be found at games when one has
to enter the highscore for instance. In total, there are five key. Four of them are cursor keys (left, right, up, down) and the fifth one 
is the enter key. As the characters are ordered in alphabetic order, movement times aren't optimized and text entry takes quite a long time.
Following, the focus shall be shifted to stylus-based text entry:
There a pointing device is used, which is a pen normally, to select characters by gesture and tapping.
One way is handwriting recognition. Because normal handwriting recognition is a difficult undertaking, "meta" languages like unistrokes or Graffiti
have been invented to simplify recognition as segmentation isn't necessary anymore.
Another stylus-based text entry method is gesture-based text input. Examples for this are Cirrin, Quikwriting and T-Cube. Letters are ordered in a 
circle like structure. Unlike character recognition-based input techniques, gesture-based text input methods, interpret stylus movements as characters.
In Cirrin, this happens for instance by moving into a character located in the circle and moving out to display it.
Finally, soft keyboards are also a stylus-based text entry method. These are keyboards directly implemented on the display and are used in every smartphone
these days.

- KÜRZEN
- EVENTUELL WENIGER UND DAFÜR GENAUER?
